
We have studied the transcriptional signatures of two forms of differentiation that mouse ES cells can undergo. The first is the spontaneous differentiation that occurs randomly in some cells within populations maintained in stem cell media. These spontaneously differentiated cells make up a usually stable fraction of the entire population. The second type of differentation we looked at involved removing the molecular factors necessary to maintain the ES cell state from the culture medium. After removal, the entire population slowly differentiates.

We used a VNP fluorescent reporter of *Nanog* expression to mark and sort cells that have deviated from pluripotency (VNP-) from fully pluripotent cellls (VNP+) in medium containing the 2i inhibitors and LIF (Figure 1a,b). We removed the 2i and LIF for a day from the culture to study culture-wide differentiation. We used RNA-Seq to quantify the gene expression changes associated to these two types of deviation from pluripotency, and the fold changes for a few known markers of pluripotency and early lineage specification are shown in Figure 1c. Pluripotency genes are unsuprisingly down in both the differentiated culture and in spontaneously deviated cells. On the other hand, the spontaneously differentiated cells show stronger up-regulation of lineage markers, particularly mesoderm, than culture-wide differentiation. Hox genes are also uniformly and strongly up-regulated in spontaneous differentiation but if anything down-regulated on culture-wide differentiation.

Looking genome wide, we identified ~3000 genes that we are confident (at a 10\% false discovery rate) are differentially expressed between pluripotent and spontaneously differentiated cells. Approximately the same number are differentially expressed when the culture undergoes a day of differentiation in the absence of 2i+LIF, and there is considerable overlap between the two sets. We analyzed the composition of these gene sets in terms of their molecular function (gene ontology). We used a "greedy" method to determine the set of molecular function categories that best describes the collection of differentially expressed genes and to assign each gene to a category. We found (Fig. 2c) that embryo development is the most important molecular function of the differentially expressed genes, closely followed by cell adhesion, a function that in earlier studies has been associated with early developmental changes. You can also notice in Fig. 2c that the set of genes up-regulated in spontaneously differentiated cells is more heavily weighted towards embryo development than the set of genes up-regulated upon culture-wide differentiation. 

Not only are embryo development and lineage marker genes highly overrepresented amongst up-regulated genes, they are also amongst the most strongly affected. As shown in Fig. S4, the lineage-associated genes from Fig. 1C are found towards the extremes of the foldchange-expression level distribution of our hits, and half of the genes with comparably extreme changes are also annotated for roles in development and pattern specification. The expression of lineage-specific markers is therefore one of the strongest features in the transcriptome signature of spontaneously differentiated cells.

Of the more than 1300 genes that we are confident are differentially expressed both upon spontaneous and culture-wide differentiation, about one third are differentially expressed in "incoherent" directions. These 459 genes are either up-regulated on spontaneous differentiation and down-regulated on culture-wide differentiation or vice versa. The former scenario includes many lineage markers, and the Hox genes, which are slightly repressed on culture-wide differentiation but are considerably more highly expressed in spontaneously differentiated cells than in pluripotent cells. 

We were intrigued by the lineage marker signature in spontaneously differentiated cells and we investigated how that is manifest at the single cell level to answer a few questions. First, we observed only mild downward fold-changes up to a factor of 2 for pluripotency genes in our *Nanog*:VNP(-) population, and we suspected that the fold-changes are artificially dampened by reporter false negative cells.  Regarding lineage-associated genes, although they constitute the  strongest expression signature of spontaneously differentiated cells, we observed upwards fold-changes in *Nanog*:VNP(-) mostly between factors of 4 and 8. Underlying this could be low-level but somewhat uniform expression of these genes in large fractions of *Nanog*:VNP(-) cells, at the level of few transcripts per cell. Instead, we considered it more likely that these lineage-associated gene may be expressed in very small and possibly exclusive subpopulations within *Nanog*:VNP(-) that represent relatively advanced stages of lineage commitment. We were also very interested to see if lineage-associated gene expression arises mostly in cells that have been thoroughly depleted of pluripotency gene expression.


            Oct4 and Rex1

We determined by RNA-FISH that *Nanog* mRNA(-) cells are severely depleted of other pluripotency markers. These cells do not express the NANOG target *Rex1* (Fig. S6C), and 70\% of them do not express *Oct4* mRNA (Fig. [[FIG:fish]]A). Since the *Oct4* mRNA half-life is quite long, with little appreciable decay even in a 6 hour observation window [AbranchesPlosONE13], the lack of *Oct4* mRNA means that these cells stopped transcribing *Oct4* for at least a day or more. Since maintaining *Oct4* gene expression within a tight concentration interval is considered essential to the ES state [NiwaNatGen00], these cells have likely exited pluripotency. The fold changes by RNA-FISH for *Oct4* and *Rex1* between *Nanog* mRNA(-) and *Nanog* mRNA(+) populations are considerably larger than those we found by RNA-Seq between cells sorted into (+) and (-) on the basis of our *Nanog*:VNP reporter. We confirmed that this can be explained by false negatives. We found that approximately 50\% of *Nanog*:VNP mRNA(-) cells in 2i + LIF are actually *Nanog* mRNA(+) and have the same distribution of *Nanog* mRNA levels as the *Nanog*:VNP mRNA(+) population (Fig. S6). On the other hand, VNP transcripts themselves are at least ten times less abundant in *Nanog*:VNP(-) than in *Nanog*:VNP(+), which establishes both the purity of our VNP sort and a close correlation between VNP protein and mRNA levels. 



        Maturity of differentiation programs by RNA FISH

To assess the uniformity of lineage marker expression within the *Nanog* mRNA(-) subpopulation, we counted *Nanog*, *Crabp2* (ectoderm lineage) and *T* (*Brachyury*, mesendoderm lineage) transcripts in `N=2360` Nd cells grown in 2i+LIF. We found that only a few cells within the set of *Nanog* mRNA(-) cells express any particular lineage priming gene but when they do, it is at the level of tens (*Crabp2*) or hundreds (*T*) of transcripts (See Fig. [[FIG:fish]]B and S8A). The majority of cells expressing *T* and the vast majority expressing *Crabp2* are *Nanog* mRNA(-). Interestingly, we observed 2/2360 cells that simultaneously expressed both of these lineage markers.


We further investigated the maturity of the lineage specification programs that are active in *Nanog* mRNA(-) cells by looking for coexpression of genes belonging to overlapping lineages using the specific example of the mesodermal markers *T* and *Tbx6* [ChapmanDevBio96]. Out of 764 cells, only two were *Tbx6* mRNA(+) and they were a subset of the seven *T* mRNA(+) cells (Fig. [[FIG:fish]]C). We note that *T* and *Tbx6* are independent mesoderm markers in the sense that the onset of *Tbx6* expression does not require the activity of *T* [ChapmanDevBio96], suggesting that a full-scale mesodermal program is underway in these few cells. 




# Discussion #

It is interesting that within stem-ness promoting cultures, spontaneously differentiated cells arise that are characterized mainly by lineage marker and developmental gene expression. In the case of culture-wide differentiation, removal of the factors in the media that maintain the stem cell state leads to cells escaping the pluripotent state and understandably evolving along lineage paths. It is nontrivial that spontaneously differentiated cells, which still experience the media factors that keep cells as stem cells in the first place, arrive at states defined by lineage and developmental marker expression. 

The strong correlations between *Nanog*, *Rex1* and *Oct4* at the single cell level shows that their switching from (+) to (-) is part of a concerted deviation from pluripotency rather than the effect of standalone transcriptional bursting. 

Especially considering that these cells are also *Oct4* mRNA(-), we conclude that the *Tbx6* up-regulation in *Nanog*:VNP(-) cannot be interpreted as lineage priming that will spontaneously revert back to the pluripotent "unprimed" ground state. This may also be the case for many more genes up-regulated in *Nanog*:VNP(-) cells.